---
layout: photo
published: true
title: Part Two&#58; John &#39;O Groats to Lands End
date: 2014-11-16 18:00
excerpt: "Part two of the story of a three week, 1300 mile, cycle across the length and breadth of the UK mainland"
thumb: /assets/camera-roll/2014/10/DSC_0993_Thumb.jpg
---

### Going for the border

We woke and were ready to leave as the campsite office opened. We had a lot of miles to do, and wanted to get going as soon as possible, and only delayed this long so we could pay the campsite fee's.

We rode back to Oban and asked a local where we could find the nearest supermarket, and were told we’d have to go out of town the wrong way. We decided to go and find a bacon butte while we decided what to do, and found **Dalmally** on the map and figured that the place appeared big enough to have a Co-op or similar where we could stock up.

It didn't take us long to reach Dalmally, where we quickly realised the place didn’t have a shop, and nor would we be able to get food anywhere nearby. As it was now lunchtime and neither of us had eaten anything since breakfast as we decided to make-up an emergency couscous packet in the station car-park.

The next part of the day to Inveraray turned out to be faster than we expected. We knew we'd have to pass through a range of hills, but were pleasantly surprised to only have to go over one set, not two or three. Having started around 50 m we had to climb to around 215 m before getting a long run down into Inveraray. The roads were wide and smooth without extreme gradients which made for fast progress as we reached our target (and lunch) in about 1:20.

After lunch we went through the usual process of finding somewhere to top-up our water bottles — particularly important with the days heat — before proceeding around the edge of *Loch Fyne*.

As we left the road we had no choice but to follow now was clearly a busy one. It was clearly a fast road for cars, and not one that has been designed with cyclists in mind. There was no run off, it was wiggly and it was relatively narrow. In all honestly, this would have been fine had it only been cars that we were competing with on the road, but the logging lorries were also present and towing as well.

It's amazing how little you can hear on a bike when you're moving with any sort of pace, and you simply don't realise how little that is until you're going through events like these. The logging lorries would come up behind us and we simply could not hear them until they were level with us; this is an utterly terrifying experience when they're within a foot of your handlebars. As soon as you think the lorry must be past you'd realise that it's towing as well, doubling its length, and will start moving back across before its even finished passing you. The only thing you can do in this situation is to hold your line and hope the drivers know what they're doing, as there was quite literally know where for us to go.

---

Eventually we made it around the loch, with regular stops to let any traffic building up behind us past. At this point we turned away from the loch and began to climb. We were no fully exposed to the sun with no tree cover, and so decided to stop and pile on some more suncream. Burning on a trip like this could become an issue, and I was already starting to show some signs.

We didn't have far to climb before we found our turning where the route levelled out, making it easier going despite still having full exposure to the sun; we stopped for breaks wherever we found any form of shelter. It was on this road as it tilted slightly down hill allowing us to bring the pace up that Max sustained the only medical incident of the trip. Thankfully this was about as minor as it gets, a bee was sucked down his Jersey and stung him on the way out.

Not long after we hit Loch Fyne once again before proceeding to turn back away and cut through a smaller range of hills towards the days goal, Dunoon. After a short climb the road stuck to the edge of yet another small loch with  steep drops down from both sides into the loch. We stopped here when we saw an opportunity for a quick break, before finishing the day by rolling into Dunoon and starting the search for a campsite.

Finding a campsite turned out to more of a challenge then either of us had anticipated. The one we had found on Google Maps simply no longer existed, the second one we located refused to take us, and then the final one we tried reluctantly took our money for what turned out to be an extremely poor site. Despite this, it was somewhere to pitch up and have an (unwillingly) cold shower before getting our heads down and preparing to pass Glasgow — the part of the tip I was least looking forward to — the next day.

---

With our aim for the day to be to get out of Scotland, we had to get moving. It  was never going to be an easy task, we were still north-west of Glasgow and had to get through the busiest and most built-up area we'd been in since passing through Edinburgh on the way up.

We were up, breakfasted, and over the river by 9:40 and ready to start properly. Initially, we nth felt like we were doing well and making good progress despite the bad roads and heavy traffic. However a quick progress check informed us otherwise, and so began what turned out to be the most frustrating day of the trip.

The coast road was busy all the way, mostly dual-carriageway and far from fun to ride on. Despite this we kept pushing on as hard as we could until we eventually hit Glasgow-Prestwick Airport around lunch time. Here we sat outside the main terminal building and ate lunch while looking at the map to see if we could cut some miles anywhere, but quickly concluded that we already had the fastest route highlighted.

We took the A713 out of the built-up area cutting through the more open country side. This turned out to be hard work, the hills were once again increasing in size and this doesn't mix well when you're trying to keep the pace high. As the day went on the roads seemed to get rougher as more potholes appeared, and the newly resurfaced areas had been done with a tacky tarmac which only slowed us down further.

As the day went on we kept pushing to try and reach the border, but the more we kept going the more obvious it became that we wouldn't make it. This became particularly clear when we stopped for a quick break at Carspharin and concluded it wouldn't be long before the quickly darkening skies did their best to soak us and all of our gear.

Within the hour we were quickly trying to find somewhere to camp as the air around us turned into a wall of rain.  After twenty of so minutes of searching we found an area which we quickly concluded 'would do' off the side of the road and just about out-of-sight if we were in the tents. This did, however, make for a *rough* wild camp as we attempted to pitch our tents on the stick and log-strewn ground. Both of us had pegs wedged wherever they would go, in cracks and between stick in the wooded ground. This does not make for good pitching when using a tension-based tent as mine was, and resulted in the outer touching the inner and thus drawing water in through the night.

Making this worse was the dried and seedy grass growing through everything, this seed got in every corner and crevice while we pitched, and covered everything else while we cooked dinner and did out best not to get eaten alive by the local midge population. The second dinner was consumed we both dived back into our tents to get and early night for the next days attempt to make up lost time.

---

We left at 8:34, having only a cereal bar and a handful of nuts for breakfast each. To get any real amount of food again, we had to reach Dumfries thirty-three miles away. How hard can it be?

Immediately we were going better than the previous day. It was slightly down hill, and the roads had improved a little at the end of the day. Despite this, it wasn't long before we hit the first hiccup; and old man flagged us down as we approached a corner.

After a few minutes we managed to decipher his thick accent and established his ageing Land Rover Defender had a burnt out clutch. We helped him move it to the side of the road, before continuing around the corner to find a downed tree blocking our path. Lucky for us there was a small footpath down sone side which was protected by another tree, so we could quickly divert around, while the cars had to queue and wait for find an alternative route.

Once in the village we found some water before pushing on. Any shops here weren't open so there was no point in hanging around. Before long we were on the A75 and heading for Dumfries, putting down a good fast pace. Once in Dumfries we quickly found a Greggs and a bench to sit on while we consumed the small mountain of food we'd just purchased.

After breakfast we left Dumfries the way we had entered (completely by accident, the signs were confusing as we had intended to leave in the correct direction). Once we finished traversing around the top of Dumfries the traffic quickly built up until it became it stopped entirely and stop-start queues formed most of the way to the motorway. Thanks to the generous run-off on the road this didn't cause us any issues as we could quickly zip down the inside of the vehicles, ensuring we could see the drivers in their side mirrors so that we knew they could see us. Before long we were pulling off the A75 so we could safely cross the border and the M6.

As rode past the first/last house in Scotland, and then shortly afterwards found the *Welcome to Cumbria* and border signs; we stopped here for a few quick pictures. As we were packing the camera away another group of cyclists appeared, a large group doing the ride with a small support team. After a quick chat we headed off expecting them to overtake us within a few minutes, but never actually saw them again.

Just after we passed over the motorway to heavens opened and it rained hard most of the way into Carlisle. We'd done well to stay relatively dry up to this point, with only one wet evening, but now we really were testing how good our dry bags were. Before long we were in Morrisons buying more lunch and getting ready to push on the Penrith.

The section of road between Carlisle and Penrith was easily the harder part of the day. As we left Carlisle we'd already done over 110km, and still had about a third of the day left. The road to Penrith was uphill all the way, and motivation was not helped when two road riders coming in the opposite direction wished us luck with the climb. In the end this part of the route took us about an hour and forty minutes, which isn't bad for two loaded bikes.

We stopped in Penrith for a quick drink and something to eat. For the first time in my life and rank a Lucozade and actually felt the energy hitting me. Afterwards I was convinced this is what got me through the final part of the day.

I was grateful at this point to be entering an area I know well. We shot a short distance up the A66 before diving off at Rheged towards Ullswater. Within an hour we were pulling on the *Gillside Farm* campsite, being questioned by the owners about what we were doing and where we had come from. After this we pitched the tents, had a shower, and went to *The Travellers Rest* for dinner before getting an early night.

### The bit in the middle

After talking in the pub the night before we changed our plan for Day 10. The previous day had been around 100km longer than it was supposed to be, so we pushed the rest day back, and decided to split the journey to Leeds into two days.

The day had a relaxed start as we had no pressure to set any volume of miles for the day, despite this we had a fairly strenuous start with the Kirkstone Pass to contest with at the end of the valley. This presents a sharp climb from the valley to the top of one of the Lake Districts small passes; despite this the gradients are still steep and long. Once we reached the top we stopped on some benches for a few minutes before getting ready to drop down *the struggle* into Ambleside.

The struggle makes for a long, fast, and bendy descent on narrow roads shared with cars, vans and the occasional coach. It's important to stay on your toes during time like this; make sure you can stop, and make sure to don't overdo the corners. We stopped twice during the decent to let Max' breaks cool, these were quickly heating up with the reduction in airflow induced by the panniers covering them. Not a problem that I had with both discs completely exposed.

Once in Ambleside we were rather restricted having the two bikes, and so decided not to stick around for too long. We followed the road around to Tescos where we stocked up on some snacks and bough some lunch before pushing on Windermere where we bought dinner and then continued working our way out of the Lake District making use of the national cycle network infrastructure which ran parallel to the main road out to Kendal.

From Kendal the main A-road to Leeds was the only option to cross the motorway and reach Kirkby Lonsdale. This road was horrendously busy with cars, vans and lorries squeezing past where there was little space and with nowhere for us to go. We moved as fast as we could, and were both grateful to reach Kirkby where we located a bench and spent a short while relaxing as we recovered.

After a short while I fired up the Google Maps app on my phone again, and we started using the satellite images to try and locate somewhere we wild camp for the night. This was an unplanned stop out here, so unlike the other evenings we had no idea where we would end up. After a short while we located a possible place, and so rejoined the main road for a few miles until we found our turn off. As we approached a small hamlet we noticed a pub and so took the opportunity to, once again, refill out bottles before heading uphill onto the Moore'.

As we climbed we stopped a small tor, and decided to make our way up as far as we could to see if we could map up there. We found a gate into the field, and proceeded to push our bikes up the steep sides until the ground levelled. We quickly realised we stumbled on a small bowl, closed on three sides but open to the west with the Tor perched just on the north edge. Looking around there was no way we'd be seen from the road of any houses in the valley from where we were and so decided to make camp.

Once pitched we sat on the small rise on the south side to cook and eat dinner, and as we did hang gliders which appeared to be launching form the Tor were gliding over the top of us, and the sun was slowly sinking behind the  Lake District and Wales on the horizon. This spot turned out to be a little gem of somewhere to spend our evening.

---

In the morning the got up and packed up pretty quickly. We'd been intending on eating breakfast after packing away, but spotted a farmers landrover making it's way up the fields in our direction. We didn't know how the landowner, if they found us, would take to us using the spot so we quickly rode back down the way we had come up the day before onto the road, and made rapid progress back down the hill to the hamlet where we had found water the night before.

Over the previous night we'd done some research into alternate routes which ran parallel to the main road, and having located part of the national cycle network which was easily picked up from here we decided to use that for a while. Using this route slowed our progress significantly but this was not a concern as we had plenty of time to get to Leeds. However, one thing that was a concern was the battery left on both of our phones. We needed to be able to phone Max's friend if we could find her house when we reached Leeds. Both of our Anker batteries were dead, and both of our phones were low. As a result we found a coffee shop in Gargrave where we stopped for a cream tea and to borrow a plug for a short while.

Max spent most of the time talking to an older local in the coffee shop while I spent the time looking at the maps trying to find decide on the best way to get to our evenings accommodation having been sent the address that morning. Before we left Max asked the local man if he had any recommendations for a route, and it turned out we were next to a part of the canal network which wasn't marked on the map we had. We decided to pick this up, and ended up riding along rough footpaths down the sides where Max's panniers would frequently try and leap from their racks and the bugie cords holds his tent onto the rack would keep snapping. This was one place where my setup, being designed for off-road riding, really came into it's own.

We eventually made it to good tarmac which sped-up the progress until we decided to leave the canal at Kildwick to find a pub to get some lunch in. Here we had a welcome sit down with a good substantial meal before pushing on for leeds.

On the outskirts of Leeds we spotted a bike-shop and so stopped. Over the last few days I'd noticed my rear tyres was wearing exceptional fast and neither of us were convinced it would make it through another day or two. As a result I popped in and managed to find a replacement tyre which we strapped to my rucksack to deal with that evening.

After this is didn't take long for us to reach the house for the night where we got a much welcomed shower, and to borrow a washing machine and tumble-dryer.

---

We left the next morning wearing clean clothes for the first time since we left John O' Groats. As we left we were planning on following the national cycle network into the city center, before picking up a branch that headed south allowing us to exit via the canal network and avoid the busy main roads.

The next few days were quite sameish. The days were all spent on the old canal networks with the of reaching Market Harbrough where we would stay with friends again. The first day took us as far as Mansfield on an extortionately expensive campsite given what we were doing. Despite the £15/each fee we did enjoy some five star facilties for the night, certainly not targeted two tired bikepackers.

On the way we had to pass through Sheffield which turned out to be a nightmare in it's own right. It has next-to-no cycle infrastructure and much of the time was spent on large two-or-three carrigeway roads. At one point a Police van pulled up next to us and told us to take the next exit. We still have no idea why they asked to do so; we were legally entitled to be where we were.

When we eventually reached our campsite that evening we didn't fit in. They charged on a per-pitch basis with one tent per-pitch. They then announced that they only had one pitch available (still more space than we needed) and refused to charge as discounted rate as a result.

Despite all of this, the facilities were five-star, and it was as good a place as somewhere to get the tents up and get ours heads down until the morning.

---

The second day to Market Harbourgh went much more soothly. We left at a reasonable time and were sat in Old Market Square in Nottingham for an early lunch. Nottingham turned out to be a dream to move through by bicycle. The cycle infrastructure covered the whole city and gave us plenty of space to move at our own pace through the traffic. So far at least, this was easily the nicest city I've ever cycled through.

As we left we made our way back onto the old canal network which we followed for as long as possible before we had to leave it to reach our destination. Unfortunately for us as we left the network the heavens opened and we were pounded with some of the heaviest rain of the trip for the next hour or so. We didn't know how long it would last and still had a reasonable distance to cover on country roads and so had no choice but to push on through it.

When we eventually reached Pete's house we were both wet and cold, but could now thankfully have a shower change into our dry clothes. That evening we sat with Pete and his family and enjoyed a good meal (thank you!) and looked over some maps with them to see if they had any suggestions for the best possible route for the next day. We had something in mind, but wanted to see if they had suggestions for how we could leave the roads as much as possible.

---
We woke fairly to hit the road. Today Pete was planning on riding with us as far as Northhampton(?) to show as the fastest way. We were set for a fairly ambitious day again hoping to make Oxford for dinner before continuing to Fairford where we would camp for the night.

Initial progress along an old dismantled railway line was fast, getting us to the point where we would part with Pete (and a third of our miles for the day were complete) over in a minimal amount of time. Once in Northhampton we left Pete outside a supermarket with the bikes while we dived in to grab some lunch before we went our separate ways.

Max and I headed for Blisworth next where we paused for a quick break, before pushing on through the back roads to Silverstone for lunch. This was a pretty event-free morning which we completed in reasonable time. As we sat down in Silverstone it started spitting with rain so we made it a fast stop before pushing on, exiting past the race track.

The afternoon seemed to drag a little compared to the morning. I think we'd underestimated the miles to Oxford, but it didn't matter hugely as we'd always planned to eat in Oxford and then push on to fairford after dinner. The area was picturesque, but there was little time for photographs as we had a large volume of miles to cover as well as bad light for photography. Looking back these aren't really good excuses, for the camera was forgotten about on the front of my bike for this part of the trip.

---

We eventually reached Oxford, which was where our day became a little more interesting. On the recomendation of one of Max' friends we located *The Turf Tavern* for dinner. Here we carefuly placed the bikes out of the way in the beer garden and located dinner. After we'd been sat down for a short while a member of staff asked us to move the bikes around the corner, and so the digging for the locks began. It was at this time that we discovered my keys were missing.

I emptied my rucksack and frame bag before repackig both in the pub garden. They weren't in either. I checked both again, and still couldn't find them. By this time food had arrived so we quickly ate while I was racking my brains trying to think where they could be. It was at this time I got a nasty feeling that they must ahve been dropped en–route. Despite this there was a chance that they were in my tent or sleeping bag; neither of these could be pulled out until we reached our campsite for the night though.

The last 41km from Oxford to Fairford took us around three hours; the whole time I was extremly aggitated. I was furious with myself for loosing the keys; I needed the keys to get back into my flat in Plymouth. I had no spares, but we also had no locks until we arrived at my mothers where a spare key for the lock was located.

When we arrived at the campsite I wasted no time in getting my tent up and then emptying everything I had. Every dry-bag was tipped upside down the tent and everything carefuly sorted through. I even turned each item of clthing inside out. Nothing.

At this point I accepted they were lost, and phoned home. Mum suggested I phone the campste where I had last seen them, just in case. The campsite turned out to be closed so I left a message and proceeded to get a long shower and an early night.

---

The next day things started to look up. I'd felt pretty awful going to bed worrying constantly about how I was going to back in my flat, but around 9:00 in the morning the campsite called me back and confirmed they had found them. The keys had a sentinel tag attached, so they dropped them in a postbox, which meant my keys would go back to their office, before being posted to my mums. Worst case I'd have to stay with friends for a few days before they arrived in Plymouth.

As we were packing up out friend James arrived on the campsite. He'd agreed to ride with us for part of the day which made for a nice change as we started to head into our own neck-of-the-woods. The start of the day was wet as it started to rain as we left the campsite, this got to the point where we had to find a tree to shelter under as we could hardly see where we were going. During one of the heavier rain-dumps we found ourselves looking at the map in the entrance to the main *Cotsworld Outdoor* store, which happens to have a rather good cafe opposite. Naturally we used this as an excuse to get out fot he rain and get something to eat.

It wasn't long after this that we passed through Royal Wootton Bassett, and then shortly after this we parted ways with James. Our arrival in Chippenham was well-timed for lunch, which we then followed up by taking a 'fun' route from Chippenham to Troewbridge where we were greated by the smells of a leg of lamb roasting in the oven (thanks mum!).

---
