---
published: true
title: From Dawn to Dusk
excerpt: Showing the other side to adventure on Dartmoor.

date: 2016-01-18 21:48
thumb: /adventures_photography/2016-01-31-group/thumb.jpg

banner: /adventures_photography/2016-01-31-group/header.jpg
banner_position: middle
tags: photography dartmoor hiking
---

Most of the trips I write about here are the ones that go well; never focusing on the other end of spectrum where things go wrong, the whether turns for the worst, and where you're made to suffer to reach your objectives. This latest trip wasn't as extreme as some, I've done _far_ worse, but it still makes for a stark contrast to the others I've written about here.

---

It was 9:00 as I stepped off the _46_ bus in Lydford Gorge. As my boot made contact with the road a familiar pitter-patter of rain falling through leaves started, as if to welcome me on my latest adventure. It would have been nice to have a dry start, but I knew this would happen sooner or later with the forecast. I quickly donned my waterproofs, starting with my GoreTex jacket and trousers, before moving on to add my gaiters over the top. For what is quite possibly the first time ever, I even remembered to pull the waterproof cover over my rucksack.

With the forecast being as bad as it was today, I might have saved this trip for another day if it wasn't for the plan to meet up with a group from the _Dartmoor and Exmoor Wild Camping_ group on High Wilhays tor for the night.

I quickly headed up the road, having a nose around the 12th century castle before moving on. There wasn't much to see; just the four walls of the tower which started life as a prison before being converted to a castle in the mid-13th century. With this done I moved on, making good time to the car park situated behind the _Dartmoor Inn_. By now the rain that had started out by greeting me had blown over, allowing me to put my waterproof trousers back in my rucksack.

I took a quick bearing to make sure I took the right track out of the carpark, and proceeded down the small lane to the footbridge over the _River Lyd_. I stopping briefly to top-up my water having drunk most of it on the bus, and popped a water purification tablet in for safe measures.

My next target, _Widgery Cross_ situated on top of _Brat Tor_, was easy to spot as it stood above me. The ground moving up to it was steep, and soon led me above the level of the surrounding hills and into the full-force of the wind with nearest wind break being _Brown Willy_ significant further west on _Bodmin Moor_. I stopped for a few minutes to take some photos before packing everything back down and getting ready to move on to my next objective.

Just as I was about to shoulder my bag I looked up to the sound of rotor blades. A few seconds later a Sikorsky S-92 Search and Rescue helicopter appeared above my next objective, _Great Links Tor_. It circled the tor a few times before proceeding to hover for several minutes, and eventually — slowly — land just out of sight from where I was. I headed off walking straight at _Great Links_ given there was nothing between me and my objective wondering as I walked if it was a real rescue or not[^1]. As I moved up the side of great links, following a small and unmarked footpath, I noticed the sound of the rotor blades intensify once again and looked up as the helicopter now appeared over the top of the section I was walking up and flew straight over the top of me heading towards Plymouth.

I continued upwards walking around the impressive tops of _Great Links Tor_ before taking shelter at the far end, out of the wind. Here I took another look at the map, having decided to skip heading to _Green Tor_ as I had originally intended; from what I could see it didn't look like it would have much to offer photographically.

I aimed for the [disused railway line][disused_railway_line] which used to run between _Bridestowe_ railway station and the _[Rattlebrook Peatworks][dartefacts_rattlebrook]_[^2]. This railway line was used to transport the peat bricks from the peatworks. It did this with horse-drawn carts, only upgrading to a converted petrol truck in it's last days. This made for easy progress down to the peatworks due to the good ground and easy terrain. The old ruins offered some form of shelter, and with a fast-flowing stream nearby where I could get some water, I decided to use this spot for a lunch stop.

Things get a little harder after the old peatworks as the ground become saturated once again. The area is clearly well trafficked through with a mixture of old wooden planks and stepping stones at the worst areas which makes crossing the majority of the bogs relatively trivial, even with a full backpacking load. I can only imagine this area is where they used to cut the peat from, and the stones were used to allow the workers to move around while the planks are newer additions.

On arrival at Kitty Tor I took shelter behind the military huts which occupy every tor with a firing-range danger flag. This made for a break from the winds which had begun to take on a much more bitter chill, bringing the temperature down at the same time. Right on queue the snow started to fall, just as I was setting up the camera. This only lasted for a few seconds, but gave a promising sign that we would get good coverage from the incoming storm.

Getting to move on once again I spent a few minutes tighten my boots for the descent into the valley where I would cross the _West Okement River_ at _Sandy Ford_. Taking a bearing of the ford to make sure I came arrived at the river in the right place I picked a path and proceeded down the hill, taking care not to slip and risk injuring myself on the steep ground. As I neared the bottom I diverted around a particularly bouldery area, noticing that there was much easier ground to travel on off to one side.

As I approached the ford I quickly realised there was going to be a problem here. The river was flowing too high and too fast — I wasn't going to be able to cross here. I decided to head upstream, I'd spotted a waterfall on the other side I wanted to have a look at while descending into the valley and hoped there might be somewhere in that direction where I could cross. This didn't work, so I continued further upstream hoping the river would narrow, or there would be some rocks I could use as stepping stones. There was nothing; I pulled out the map, hopeful to find something useful.

I had two options. I could head south and hope the ground was dry enough to cross at the source of the river, and risk being forced back if it was too wet and too boggy. Alternatively, I could go north and cross using the footbridge over weir at _Vellake Corner_. This second option required covering over twice the distance to cross the river, but was a guarantee of crossing. From where I was I could clearly see that *High Willhays* was shrouded in fog, and so arriving in daylight was important if I was to find the group I was supposed to be meeting up there. I headed north, now using both walking poles to help keep the pace up.

I stuck close to the edge of the river where the ground was firmest as moving back more than 5 or so meters left me in a bog. Before long I was passing the _Black-a-Tor Copse_ nature reserve, and it was just past here where I spotted a group of five or six backpackers on the far bank. I suspected it at the time, but they later confirmed it was once of the other parties heading up to High Willhays on the route I would later take.

It took around an hour to reach the footbridge at the weir, turning up in less style than I'd hoped as I slipped on the steep grass hill side making my way down to it, having been forced higher up by the steep gradient near _Shelstone Tor_. Thankfully no damage was done as my large rucksack took the worst of the fall, so I proceeded over the bridge before taking advantage of this final water source of the day to clean the mud from my hands and take on my maximum volume of water ready for making food and drink at the camping spot.

Heading up the track back towards the nature reserve I was now carrying a full two kilograms more than I had started with at the beginning of the day, a volume I noticed very quickly. A couple of minutes later a lady in her bright–pink jacket stopped me and asked what I was doing. I told her I was walking from Lydford Gorge to High Willhays, only to be asked what I was training for. I told her this wasn't training, and I did it for fun, leaving her with a look of disbelief on her face as she walked off, no doubt going back to her car to drive home with her partner and spend the evening in front of the TV.

I kept my pace fast, estimating another 90-minutes of guaranteed light with the low cloud that would be fog higher up, and set myself of reach _High Willhays_ within an hour. It didn't take long for the track to run out, where I had to head off piste. I picked a sensible looking line up to _Black Tor_ which got the climbing out of the way quickly, before turning to my final destination which, although somewhere above me and less than 1400 meters away, could not be seen. I took a bearing for the top of the tor and proceeded to walk on it. Sixty minutes after leaving the wier on the river I arrived on top of _High Willhays_.

I was surrounded by fog, and High Willhays is a big tor. I had no idea where the others would be camping, and quickly realised, especially in the high winds, I was only going to find them by trail and error. I pulled out the map again and started thinking about where I'd camp in these condtions; it would have to be on the east side to get some shelter from the wind, probably behind one of the three clumps of rock that make-up the summit. There's a group camping, so the biggest would be a sensible place to start. With that a large hole in the clouds moved over, clearing the fog. I turned and there was a tent with two people stood next to it; I grabbed my gear, stuffing the map back in and made for it.

A I stopped now I quickly realised how tired I was; I'd only eaten a packet of fig rolls and a *Pot Noodle* all day. [Mike][] quickly showed me where the main group of tents were, and I pitched in the middle of the group with Mike's help to stop the tent from blowing away while I did so. The wind made pitching the tent a struggle, so I attached some backup guy lines to the additional four tabs to reinforce the existing ones, not wanting to have to get up in the night to fix a collapsing tent.

With the tent up I pulled my cooker out and proceeded to cook some food just inside the porch and sort my equipment out, piling on extra layers to help keep the cold wind at bay. 

---

I'd made it up in 1 hour and 10 minutes in the end, a good time in such conditions. It was now that I needed to put my tent up that I noticed just how strong the wind was up here, even in the leigh of the hill. As soon as I pulled my tent out it was going to turn into a kite. I took my rucksack off and dropped it on the ground. Another observation: I was tired. I'd only eaten a packet of fig rolls and a pot noodle all day. I needed food, but to get food I needed shelter.

I pegged the tent out to stop it blowing away, and Mike came over to help as I started to wrestle the pole into its sleeve. This is easier said than done when the wind it constantly trying to rip it out of your hands. Within a few minutes the tent was standing by itself, but I quickly decided it would be wise to put the four spare guy lines on their mount points to, in this wind the last thing I wanted was for a peg to rip-out in the night.

With the tent now I I quickly stuck one water on to boil just inside the porch, and made up my pasta-pot and a mug of tea. Within minutes I was feeling more like a human again; I wrestled the camera out of it's protective casing, and went to say hello to the others.

We stood around chatting until it got dark, and each of us retreated to our tents for a brew. It was as I ducked inside the snow started coming down, and quickly began to settle; it only lasted a few minutes. With that, I retired to the tent to read about _Andy Kirkpatrick_ suffering instead.

---

I thought I was dreaming at first, nobody would be calling my name right now. I was too busy sleeping. After a minute of so I came round; it was Mikes voice I could here. The wind had clearly picked up in the night, and I wrestled the opening on my sleeping bag open, reluctant to leave its warmth. As soon as I sat up another gust came down on the tent, the centre pole jamming itself into the side of my head.

Shouting through the tents material to converse with Mike I established the air pressure was dropping, meaning the whether was only going to get worse. It seemed I was the only one that was still sleeping through the storm (I've always said I can sleep through anything), and that everyone else had agreed to pack-up and move out in half an hour before it could get too much worse.

I quickly packed everything inside my tent into dry bags, piling on the layers knowing it was going to be cold outside, both due to the air temperature and the winds. With all my layers on I went to unzip the door; as soon as I released the storm clip at the bottom the wind whipped the fabric from my hand, and finished unzipping it for me. I threw my rucksack and poles out before following them, to find that Mike was just resting his tent into its bag.

I turned to my tent now, wedging all of the stuff bags under my rucksack. I now unpegged each of the down-wind guy lines. Stuffing these pegs away I left the lines hanging; I'd sort them at home out of the wind. Next I went to remove the four downstream pegs; the first came out, the second followed and just as I pulled the third out the entire tent turned into a kit, shooting upwards and throwing most of the remaining pegs into my face.

Thankfully two of us were able to jump on it before the last peg ripped, saving the tent from quickly flying away.

With this I wrestled the pole out of it, stuffed it away and strapped it to my rucksack before it tried to fly away again. We each helped others fight the battle against the wind, none of us leaving until everyone was ready, we moved away as a group. With these conditions I was happy to say that I wouldn't be walking all the way back to get the bus again today, but had been offered a lift to Newton abbot station by Mike.

As we arrived in the carpark a couple of hours later each of us quickly exclaimed our love for GoreTex as we stripped out waterproofs off and find nothing worse than slightly damp clothes below where the water had been blown in. With this, we all said out goodbyes, a new set of friend and a new set of stories, and headed off for the warmth of our homes to sort our gear out.

[^1]: I haven't been able to find any evidence of a rescue happening. There was nothing on any of the four _Dartmoor Search and Rescue_ team websites, or on _Grough_, which leads me to think it must have been a training excerise.

[^2]: OS Grid: SX559871


[dartefacts_rattlebrook]: http://dartefacts.co.uk/dartefact/rattlebrook-peatworks-bricks/ "Rattlebrook Peatworks Bricks"
[disused_railway_line]: http://www.brucehunt.co.uk/Rattlebrook.html "History of the Rattlebrook Peat Railway"
