---
published: true
title: First Impressions on the Fuji X-T1
excerpt: "A first look at the Fuji X-T1 as a adventure and landscape photographers primary camera."

date: 2016-01-17 18:07
tags: technology camera gear

thumb: /notebook/2016-01-17-fuji-xt1-first-impressions/thumb.jpg
banner: /notebook/2016-01-17-fuji-xt1-first-impressions/header.jpg
---

Something that seems to go hand in hand with photography is a large pile of equipment. For those of us who place ourselves within the _adventure photography_ bracket it extends far beyond camera gear as I've [previously demonstrated][blog_start_backpacking]. This post will only focus on photographic equipment.

What I'm going to look at here is everything from the basics of what camera body I'm currently using and what lenses I'm working with all the way through to what filters I'm putting in front of the lens, and in what situations I might do so. This is an interesting point in gear selection for me, as I've just switched away from a Nikon system in order to cut weight and packsize due to the conditions in which I primarily work.

For those who are not interested in why I've chosen the gear I have, you can skip down to _the big list_ near the bottom of this article.

## Body and Lenses

The camera body I'm currently shooting with is the Fuji X-T1. It's stille arly days with it as I've only had it for a few weeks as of now, but I'm loving it so far as I explained when I published [my initial thoughts on it][blog_fuji_xt1]. The main motivations for this body was the small size and weight while it retains the performance of my previous camera, a Nikon D7100. Much of this was motivated by plans for a bigger expedition similar to my [previous John O' Groats][blog_jogle1] to [Lands End trip][blog_jogle2] a few years back.

I'm currently shooting with two lenses, which cover the vast majority of my needs. First up is the _Fuji 18-55 ƒ2.8-4 XF Zoom_. This is a kit lens option with the X-T1 camera body, and is incredibly sharp lens which is a pure joy to use. The build quality is far beyond anything I've seen in a kit lens before, and it really does put the offerings from the likes of Nikon and Canon to shame.

The second lens is the opposite extreme to the electronics filled Fuji lens. It's a completely manual _Samyang 12mm ƒ2_. This lenshas mechanical aperature control, and mechanical focus. There are no electronics at all: you actually need to tell the camera body the shoot **without a lens** for it to work with the Samyang. There are plenty of options out there which doe allow for automatic aperature and focus on the market, but they were simply out of budget during this switch. This lens is an absolute steal at £250[^1].

With these two lenses I've got a high-quality mid zoom for taking adventure and action images of people doing things where you often can't get right up-close. Meanwhile the ultra-wide lens covers most of my landscape needs, although I'd like to add a 10mm and a 14mm to my primes collection in the future.

## Filters

I've spent a number of years using the Cokin P-Grade filter system. This has seen little use over the last year as the field-of-view on my old  _Sigma 10-20 ƒ3.5_ was simply too wide, and clipped every filter holder I could find. Since switching to the Fuji system I can easily mount these on each of my lenses once again.

The filter I primarily use a 10-stop neutral density filter. These are so dark you can't actually see through them unless you hold them up to a _very_ bright source of light, such as the sun or a powerful lightbulb. The use of these filters has become a bit of a trademark filter for me over the last year and it's become increasingly rare to see me without when shooting dramatic landscapes. Examples of image shot using these are [St. Micheals Chapel over at Rame Head][image_rame_head] a few months back, or [Loch Etive in Scotland][image_loch_etive] last summer, which I achived by stacking _two_ of these filters to achive a 15-minute exposure.

Being able to mount a square filter adpater again now means I'm doing less HDR blending to get the same result. These adapters allow me to stack filters on top of each other to balance the light, bringing it all into the dynamic range of my camera. This is achvied by using **graduated filters** whicha re darker at the top than at the bottom. By lining the darker area up with the brighter area of the sky you can decrease it's brightness to make it closer to that of the foreground. This allows you to use a longer expsure without clipping the highlights and loosing any details[^2].

I've currently got a rangre of these filters from lighter solid neutral density filters through to soft graduated and hard graduated filters.

On thing I do need to add to my collection is a polariser filter for each lens as this will allow me to cut the relefection on water caused by strong summer sun, or cut through gentler relfections in order to see through the water. These will be essential when photographing landscapes under the strong mediterranean sun next summer.

## Flashes

I do very little flash lit photography these days, but they're useful to have and I do have a selection of shots I'd like to do with some in the future. I currently have two flashes; the Fuji EF-X8 and a cheap own-brand Jessops one.

I bought the Jessops one simply because it was the cheapest Nikon compatible unit which could be used as a wireless slave if I wanted to. This isn't compatible when mounted directly on my Fuji body, however I can still use it with it. By configuring the Fuji flash to act as a commander[^3] I can trigger it as a wireless flash. Keep an eye on my [twitter account][social_twitter] for the results of doing this as I'm currently planning a few shoots over the next few months.

## Accessories

I use a third-party Hamya remote shutter release with my X-T1. It's designed for canon cameras, but the software inside the Fuji body is smart a recognizes it, despite it needing to be plugged in via the microphone port. I actually prefer the interface with these, as the Fuji ones plug in via micro sub which can be fiddly, especially with gloves on.

I currently use a Black Rapid RS-7 strap. This isn't fitted very often as it stops the camera sitting flat when I place it on a table, something I alway find a little irritable. The strap allows the camera to hand by my side, and it can be quickly raised to my eye without any faff and without the strap getting in the way as it hangs off the bottom, by screwing an adapter into the tripod mount. I tend to remove this (although often still take it with me) for backpacking or day walks too, as I prefer keeping the tripod plate attached for a quick set-up and tear-down.

I'm a bit of a brand snob when it comes to SD cards, particularly since I only have a single slot on the Fuji[^4] and so there is increased risks of loosing data due to a card failure or loss. This is something I'm always slightly cautious of, and mentioned in [my review of the Fuji X-T1][blog_fuji_xt1]. As a result of this I always use SanDisk SD cards, the extreme range in particular and always the _pro_ ones when available.

To ensure cards don't suffer any damage when they're not in the camera I keep the, inside a XXXX case. This case is shock-proof, waterproof and dust proof. I've dropped both it and other things onto it a few times, and it still looks like new. I intentionally get brightly colored ones to make the, easier to find inside rucksacks or in the dark.

I've tried a 3rd party battery for the Fuji, but have found the, not to work as well as the Fuji ones in cold conditions. The _Digipower_ battery actually has a higher capacity than Fujisawa own batteries, but in the cold I've found the die very quickly. During the sunrise shoot I covered in _From Dawn to Dusk_ I actually had it die in about 90-minutes. It wasn't fully charged when I left, but when I got it home and it had warmed back up I found it to have two thirds charge still. It seems ok in warmer conditions so I may pickup a few more for longer summer trips, but they're certainly not suited to winter conditions. Fuji's own battery lasted all day without any issues, so I've since order a extra one for those shorter but much colder winter shoots.

## The Big List

For the sake of comprehensiveness, here's the full gear listing. This doesn't include any old gear I've kept for sentimental value, or anything I've currently got for sale or will be selling soon (if you're after some good Nikon gear, keep an eye on [my Twitter account][social_twitter]).

* **Camera and Lenses**: Fuji X-T1 body; Fuji 18-55mm f/2.8–4 XF Zoom; Samyang 12mm f/2
* **Filters**: 3x SRB Photographic ND1000; Cokin P.182, 153, 146, 132; XXX filter holder; XXX adapter rings; XXXX stepping rings
* **Flashes**: Jessops; Fuji
* **Accessories**: SanDisk Extreme Pro 16GB x3, Pro 32GB x2; Black Rapid RS-7; Hamya remote shutter; Digipower battery; Fuji NP-W123 x2

Although all of this gear cheap compared to some other photographers setups, it's still a **big** capital outlay; for me at least, it's a **lot** of money. If you want to help support my work as a photographer the best thing you can do is follow me on the social networks listed below, or drop me an email about purchasing some prints.



[blog_start_backpacking]: /notebook/2015/07/getting-started-backpacking/ "Getting started backpacking: an eye-opener as to the volume of gear required to visit remote places"
[blog_fuji_xt1]: /notebook/2016/01/fuji-xt1-first-impressions "Initial thoughts using the Fuji X-T1 as a landscape photographer"
[blog_jogle1]: /adventures-photography/2014/11/JOGLE/ "Part one of my John O' Groats to Lands End expedition"
[blog_jogle2]: /adventures-photography/2014/12/JOGLE-2/ "Part two of my John O' Groats to Lands End expedition"
[image_rame_head]: https://www.facebook.com/danielgrovesphotography/photos/pb.1431208830514934.-2207520000.1453650364./1505734163062400/?type=3&theater "St. Micheals Chapel on Rame Head"
[image_loch_etive]: https://www.facebook.com/danielgrovesphotography/photos/pb.1431208830514934.-2207520000.1453650364./1505734436395706/?type=3&theater "Loch Etive, Scotland"
[social_twitter]: https://twitter.com/danielsgroves "Daniel Groves on Twitter"


[^1]: I'll probably do a review of this lens in the future, if time allows.

[^2]: If there is enough interest I'll write a more detailed blog post on the use of graduated filters in the future.

[^3]: The Fuji EF-X8 flash is only a very basic unit for mounting directly on the camera body. It's included with the X-T1 bodu to make up for the lack of a built-in flash.

[^4]: The Nikon D7100 I had previously had two slots, and allowed me to run the secondary one as a clone of the first one. If an SD card failed or I lost one I wouldn't loose a single image.
