---
published: true
title: Eurovelo
excerpt: A charity cycle expedition across Europe.

date: 2016-04-14 08:30
tags: eurovelo bike expedition

thumb: /notebook/2016-04-14-eurovelo/thumb.jpg
banner: /notebook/2016-04-14-eurovelo/header.jpg
---

A few years ago a friend and I completed the infamous [John O' Groats][jogle1] to [Lands End][jogle2] cycling challenge with a twist of our own, taking in much of Scotland that is missed by many people as we weaved through the outer hebridean islands. We didn't stop their as we took in parts of Cumbria, Yorkshire, the midlands, Somerset, Exmoor and Cornwall that are normally missed out. This added over 400 extra miles to our route.

As some people will already know this summer we're stepping up again, this time with even bigger plans. As I write this we've been working toward this trip for nearly ten months, planning our route, researching foreign countries and saving the funds we require to complete the challenge. The endgame is simple: **fly to Thessaloniki (Greece) and cycle home again (England)**.

As it stands we'll be leaving the UK on Sunday 5th June at a rather horrendous 5PM, before landing at 11PM local time in Greece. We will then begin the process of cycling over 5000KM home. That's well over double out lands end challenge.

During this trip we're hoping to do a few things, but primarily we'll be raising funds for _Plymouth Homeless_, _Oxfam refugee appeal_, and _Mountain Rescue England and Wales_. During this trip I'm hoping to take some time to focus on my photography, in the process building a catalogue of images to tell the story of our trip.

If all goes to plan, our route should look something like that which is presented on the map below.

## Route Details

Full route data will be released in the coming weeks. It takes a long time to produce mapping for a route of this length, but once this is complete the route and the statistics will be uploaded here.

## Updates and Support

You can donate to the trip on Just Giving. I'll be doing my best to post updates as we go depending on where I can find wifi or we get free data for our phones. These updates will be going on Twitter, Instagram and Facebook. Keep checking back here too, I will put something when we get back from the trip, but it might take a while to appear as I will be jetting off again very quickly afterwards for the next trip.

### Mountain Rescue England and Wales

The Mountain Rescue provide a vital service for anyone who spends time in the more remote areas of England and Wales. When accidents occur these volunteers give up their own time to support the emergency services in helping those who are lost, taken ill, injured or otherwise stranded in most difficult circumstances. Equipment and training is expensive and they are notoriously underfunded, and receive little to no government support on both individual team and national level. During the Lakes District floods of christmas 2015 the mountain rescue mustered a huge effort to support the local communities and provide swift-water rescue services.

{% quote author:"Richard Warren, Chairman of the Lake District Search and Mountain Rescue Association" url:http://www.newsandstar.co.uk/news/More-than-500-mountain-rescuers-took-part-in-Cumbria-floods-emergency-response-25dc6118-9e5f-4bbb-a260-fe4e6b4c77cd-ds title:"New and Star on the Cumbria Floods Response" %}
  On Christmas Day, the region mustered 70 out of 150 mountain rescue swift water rescue technicians, along with a further 53 support team members and 30 4X4 vehicles, ready to leave families and be deployed in the event of an expected second storm to hit Cumbria
{% endquote %}

The Mountain Rescue provided a 500-strong support during this crisis.

{% quote author:"Richard Warren, Chairman of the Lake District Search and Mountain Rescue Association" url:http://www.newsandstar.co.uk/news/More-than-500-mountain-rescuers-took-part-in-Cumbria-floods-emergency-response-25dc6118-9e5f-4bbb-a260-fe4e6b4c77cd-ds title:"New and Star on the Cumbria Floods Response" %}
  There is very little in the way of central funding, therefore fundraising remains an ongoing and very important task for the teams, with annual costs running at between £30,000 and £80,000 per team and rising.
{% endquote %}

You can [donate to the Mountain Rescue via Just Giving][donate_mrt].

### Oxfam Syria Refugee Appeal

After we initially envisioned this trip the Syria refugee crisis occurred and it came to us that our route was not dissimilar to that of the refugees. We will have the creature comforts and paperwork for our journey however the refugees will have nothing; we aim to raise awareness and funds as we make this journey and Oxfam has a well-established history of expertise in humanitarian crisis situations.

You can [donate to the Oxfam Syria Refugee Appeal via Just Giving][donate_oxfam].

### Shekinah Mission

A local Devon charity who help to support and rehabilitate the homeless in and around Plymouth. Max and Dan both went though university in Plymouth where both still live. Max and Dan encounter the homeless on a regular basis in the city and are both uneasy that support is underfunded for such people, and spare change isn’t enough to support them in the long run. Supporting a charity that understands and helps will be an effective way of making a difference to the people who need it the most.

You can [donate to the Shekinah Mission][donate_shekinah] via their website. They currently do not use Just Giving.

## Press and/or media enquiries

If you'd like more information or to feature the trip, please get in contact. I'm reachable anytime by email: <hello@danielgroves.net>.

[donate_mrt]: https://www.justgiving.com/Eurovelo16 "Donate to the Mountain Rescue"
[donate_oxfam]: https://www.justgiving.com/Eurovelo16a "Donate to Oxfam"
[donate_shekinah]: http://www.shekinahmission.co.uk/raising-money/ "Donate to the Shekinah Mission"

[jogle1]: /adventures-photography/2014/11/JOGLE/ "John O' Groats to Lands End Part 1"
[jogle2]: /adventures-photography/2014/12/JOGLE-2/ "John O' Groats to Lands End Part 2"
